---
slug: "jelena"
breadCrumb: "jelena"
title: "Jelena Žanić Mikuličić"
role: "Senior Lecturer, Erasmus Coordinator"
photo: "/images/team/jelena.jpg"
---

Jelena Žanić Mikuličić was born on June 20, 1980, in Split, Croatia, where she completed her primary and secondary education. In 1998, she enrolled at the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zadar, majoring in German and English Language and Literature, earning her degree in 2004. In 2016, she began her doctoral studies in Linguistics at the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Split, as well as the doctoral program in Logistics and Management in Maritime Affairs at the Faculty of Maritime Studies in Rijeka, completing the latter in 2024.
In late 2012, she completed a postgraduate specialist program in Business Economics at the Faculty of Economics in Split. In December 2013, she became an English language lecturer at the Faculty of Maritime Studies in Split. She also conducted practical sessions in Maritime English for other study programs, actively contributing to the modernization and translation of curricula into English. Additionally, she delivers lectures for the Special Educational Program for Marine Engineers to attain engineering qualifications. From 2024 she holds the position of senior lecturer. Since 2020, she has been an external lecturer at the University Department of Marine Biology and Technology and the University Department of Forensic Sciences.
As of February 2023, she is a member of the project Upgrading and Harmonization of Maritime Law STCW-Based Curriculum for Maritime Law (MareLaw). She regularly participates in conferences and workshops. She is also a member of the Organization Committee of the International Maritime Lecturers Association (IMLA), member of the Association of Language for Specific Purposes Teachers at Higher Education Institutions (UNJSVU), the Croatian Association of English Teachers (HUPE), and the Croatian Association for Applied Linguistics (HDPL). She provides editing and translation services for academic papers across various disciplines and reviews articles and teaching materials in the field of humanities, specifically philology. She holds certificate as an internal auditor for quality management according to the ISO 9001:201 and GMDSS radio operator with a general license. Since 2006, she has served as a certified court interpreter for English and German. From 2025, she is translator and editor for the journal Naše more. She also holds the position of Erasmus coordinator at the Faculty of Maritime Studies since 2024.
