---
slug: "xavier"
breadCrumb: "xavier"
title: "Francesc Xavier Martínez de Osés, Ph.D."
role: "Associate Professor, Coordinator of Nautical and Maritime Transport Degree"
photo: "/images/team/xmo.jpg"
---

Francesc Xavier Martínez de Osés obtained his Civil Marine degree with a final extraordinary award in March of 1997. Previously he obtained the Business Sciences degree in June of 1990. In 1994 he started sailing, initially as a cadet, later as officer in different merchant ships, like Ro/Ro, oil tanker and containerships, and finally as third officer in Reefer ships and Second Officer in Chemical tanker ships; all them with foreign flags. After that, in September 1998, he joined to UPC as part-time lecturer and initiated his PhD. At the same time, he worked in a consultancy company focused in the participation in maritime area projects within the 5th and 6th Framework programmes.

In September of 2003 he obtained his PhD degree by the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, with the qualification of Cum Laude. He developed his PhD research in the framework of the ATOMOS IV project (2001-2004). The architecture developed in his thesis was focused in the development of a weather information software to be used in the recently adopted Integrated Bridge Systems on board ships. After defending the thesis, he started as full-time lecturer in the Nautical faculty of Barcelona.

Once finished his PhD, he worked in completing some projects in a consultancy company, a fact that allowed him not only to maintain the contact with other European research centres, but also to integrate in international working groups. Some of the results were later the participation of the Nautical sciences and engineering department in EU TEN-T projects, such as MONALISA 2.0 and Sea Traffic Management (STM).

Some projects where he participated as researcher were INECEU (Ministry of Transport 2003-2005), EU ASEAN (EC Project directed by Cardiff University, 2004 to 2005), ICARO (ProFit project 2005 to 2006), Inspection of ports with a ROV (Ministry of Science, from 2006 to 2008), ANTARES (Ministry of Transport, 2007) or LAERTES (Ministry of Transport, 2009), the latest related to the air pollution performance of short sea shipping lines compared with the trucks serving the same transport corridor.

In March of 2010, he became Associate Professor (Profesor titular de universidad) at the Nautical Sciences and Engineering Department. From January 2011 to March 2018, Dr. Martínez was the Head of Department, taking again the same role from April 2022 up to now.

Since the beginning of his academic career, Dr. Martínez has been teaching Marine meteorology, together with Stowage and maritime Economy. Previously, he also taught Pollution prevention and Safety at Sea, in the Nautical Science and Maritime Transport Management degree and master. At the same time, he leads a research group named TRANSMAR, focused on the analysis of the environmental risk in short sea shipping transport. In this framework, he has been the responsible in the UPC for several international projects, apart from the mentioned MONALISA 2.0 and STM, such as MArED- Modernizing and harmonizing maritime education in Montenegro and Albania (European Commission).

Dr. Martínez participated as researcher in several national projects like ProfeSion (Ministry of Science) in which the effect of propellers (helices) at the bottom of the Morrot dock (part of Barcelona) and the port of Palma de Mallorca was studied. The study focused on the erosion caused by the repeated maneuvers of Grimaldi ferries, which led to the undermining of the base of the docks. In order to minimize the erosion of the dock’s bottom, alternative maneuvers were explored using the maneuver simulator of the WÄRTSILÄ Simulator at the Faculty of Nautical Studies.

In addition, TUGEMI (Ministry of Science) is a project initiated in the last quarter of 2023, in which it is scheduled to measure the real emission of pollutants by the tugs operating in ports. With the help of the simulator and specific models of tugs, the project will try to suggest better operational schedules for reducing the air pollution generated by tugs. Keeping in mind the wide gap of time in which tugs are waiting for orders when involved in manoeuvres, these recommendations will afford to improve the pollutant performances of these boats.

The last directed PhD Thesis, carried out by Dr. Nelson Díaz (2023) dealt with the pollution dispersed in port waters by the scrubbers running on an open loop system. The problem analysed in this work was to measure the change of acidity in port waters after the mooring of a ship using a scrubber in a hybrid or open loop system. The thesis also suggested a system to clean the exhaust waters in order to control not only the acidity but also other substances as soot and other residues.

At the UPC, XMO also has worked as an evaluator of the Galicia Accreditation Agency. Currently he is the coordinator of the degree of Nautical and Maritime Transport in the Nautical Faculty of Barcelona. Finally, he also participates in the supervision of several final degree projects, master thesis and doctoral thesis.

The scientific production up to now has been 89 publications, 90 contributions in congresses and 7 books as author or co-author, 8 PhD thesis and director of 5 international congresses.
